[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hey, I'm Ashleigh Sergeant,
and welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment," your go-to
show for tips on how to be more
conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
In our Western society,
we're typically not
taught crucial skills to
work with or process energy,
culturally we are more
familiar with terms
like "man up," "big girls
don't cry," and "fake it
until you make it."
But euphemisms
like this actually
cause us to ignore our
fundamental human emotions
and energies.
Then, these
unprocessed experiences
often show up as
unchecked anger,
irrational fear, chronic
anxiety, and deep sadness.
My guest today, Kevin Courtney,
has dedicated the last 20 years
to the pursuit of
awakening consciousness.
He works as an executive
consciousness consultant
for business and thought leaders
through his program, Insight.
And his work has been featured
in Well and Good, Vogue,
The New York Times, and Vice.
Kevin, thank you so much
for joining me today.
>> So happy to be here.
Thank you.
>> Yeah, so some of the
things that we're conditioned
to in our Western society,
our modern society,
I never even looked at them or
had a second thought that these
might be things that are
actually causing some
of the suffering or some of
the challenges that I had.
And until I started to
really understand the body,
the mind, emotions
through the lens of yoga--
a lot of times we've
been taught in the past,
your mind's up here.
Just stop thinking about it.
It'll go away.
Stop paying attention to that.
And that's not really
the case, is it?
>> From the traditions
perspective,
it would look at the body really
as a vessel for the whole human
experience.
So we're looking at--
or coming to see, through
the practice of yoga,
that this vessel
contains both energy,
thought, feelings, and
then, on a deeper level,
this essential nature
of consciousness itself.
And so I think, from
the cultural perspective
of how we're kind of
governed in so many ways
to be external in our attention,
that both the practices of yoga
themselves and then the
philosophy turns all of that
upside down or inward so
we reorient our awareness
to really get a sense of what's
going on inside ourselves.
>> These particular
quotes that I talked about
in the beginning, these concepts
of like, oh, just man up,
or big girls don't cry, we can
kind of be laissez-faire with
it, and joke, and say, oh,
they're just kind of Western
cultural idioms or sayings,
and it doesn't mean anything.
But really, actually, they
have some pretty serious
implications when we think about
them, in the sense of, oh, you
can't cry, or just
man up and do it.
It's really a numbing to or a
disregarding of our experience
of ourselves, of both thoughts,
and then thoughts that
trigger feelings and
emotions, and then
emotions that manifest
energy in the body.
And so it's all connected.
And if you'll just tell
us a little bit about how
you see that, and some
of the struggles people
are having with that today.
>> Yeah, I think the most
relevant thing that I see
in my work is first, just people
coming to a place where they
can come to terms with how
they feel, and accept it,
and be OK with it, which
is in relationship to what
you're talking about, kind of
being conditioned to think that
it's not OK for me to feel
this, or it's not OK for me
to express this, which
is so naturally built
into our culture
in so many ways.
I think the first
order of business
is really to become
aware of what's present,
and then to do
whatever work it takes
to have a sense of
self-compassion or love,
or understanding, or even
going so far as to accept how
you feel at any given moment.
And I think that's the first
hurdle for most people,
even whether you're
talking about coming
into a physical yoga class,
and people coming in,
and going to do the stretch.
And maybe they're
conditioned to really get it.
And if they don't get it, then
there's frustration or there's
anger, or there's a sense of,
well, I'm not doing this right.
And then going maybe to a more
subtle, more life off the mat,
how we act in our every
day, this sense of first
really coming to terms
with what is present.
And I think the
tradition would say
that's going to come
through awareness.
So pausing at any given
moment to take a pulse of what
is it that you're really
feeling in the moment.
And not that that always
needs to be expressed,
but when you meet it on your
own, with your own awareness,
with a sense of
acceptance, or kindness,
or compassion, transformation
immediately occurs.
>> Well, instead of
trying to push it away.
I'm thinking of two
examples, of a parent who
may get really, really,
really angry at their child.
I shouldn't feel
angry at my child.
I love my child.
I've had many friends kind of
share this experience, that we
kind of shame
ourselves sometimes
into thinking that it's not
OK to feel that, and then
just brush it under the table.
But you're saying just
feel it in that moment,
and address it,
and be aware of it,
as opposed to being aware of it
and pushing away, be with it.
>> 100%.
Come into contact
with what is there.
And what you gain
by doing that is you
start to acquire skillful
means to be present to whatever
fluctuation happens.
I think there's a huge
misconception in the yoga world
that this state of yoga is
just this sublime stillness.
>> Or just happiness.
>> Yeah.
And that's such a
huge misunderstanding.
And it's like, to
me, the depth of yoga
is most luminous, and exciting,
and radiant when we're
talking about being
present to what
is present in the moment
from a human perspective.
If we don't come to terms with
anger, or resentment, or grief,
or fear, or all the things
that make us human--
we don't come to terms with
that first, and we compress it,
or we don't meet it,
then that essentially
starts to deeply load
our subconscious mind
or our unconscious mind.
We begin to see the world in
a completely different way
because we're stacked
full of these deeply
restrained feelings.
And so I think, again, when
you look at the system--
whether it's yoga, or whether
it's a system like qi gong
that really looks to start
to dismantle us, or open
us, or create space,
then those feelings
start to move, and transform.
And we essentially end up
gaining space, or gaining
presence, or acquiring a
better perspective on what's
going on in the present
moment, versus having so much
unresolved within ourselves that
then just becomes a projection,
and we start to create
a false reality based
on how we're seeing
things based on things
that we're holding
that we're not
even aware that we're holding.
>> Like, for example--
this is one that
I think is pretty
easy to follow the string of--
if we have certain
feelings or emotions,
whether it's frustration,
or anger, or guilt,
and we don't think
it's OK to feel them,
and we don't think it's
OK to express them,
and then we just
keep holding them in,
after a while, that
can quickly turn to,
nobody ever listens
to me; I'm all alone.
And that can turn into a
really, really deep sadness.
Nobody hears me, nobody
understands what I'm
going through, or screw this.
People aren't paying
attention/don't listen to me
can easily turn into anger.
And we see this manifesting
in our world a lot today,
where actually that just
becomes a projection of us not
having resolved or
come to an honest place
with what we're feeling.
And it becomes all these
things that the outside world
is doing to us.
>> Yeah, totally.
And so again, when you
look at the tradition
and you look at what it's asking
of us as practitioners, what
it's asking us to do, on a
physical level, we are going in
and we're modifying things like
the energy in our solar plexus.
Twists, forward
folds, back bends,
these kind of directly
physical things
we can do to start to
create some release
or create some movement.
But then I think
what really I would
love to point out in
this conversation,
and exactly what you're
saying, is that there's
energetic intelligence as well.
We are so conditioned to think
we're just a body and a mind.
But then we also have
this vital energy.
We've got this animating
force within us that,
again, from the
traditions perspective,
that vitality, that energy,
has its own intelligence.
So we're talking about
awakening a power
or awakening a force within
us that, as it begins to move,
it purifies the deficiency,
or it will move the block,
or it will release that
unexpressed emotion,
and we'll have a
cathartic experience.
And that's what's
meant to happen.
So from the practice
perspective,
it's like things are meant
to get a little messy.
And I think that's
again a big part
of the misunderstanding
of, well,
yoga should make me feel good.
And it's like, it
probably will eventually.
[LAUGHTER]
But it could also really bring
you into some intense material.
We're really looking
at, ultimately,
a kind of dismantling, all
the way down to the substance
of the psyche, which is as deep
as we can get within ourselves.
And from that
place, this emergent
healing awareness and a greater
capacity to see ourselves,
and to know ourselves.
And then, therefore, that takes
us into our world in a more--
we're poised, and the condition
has been created for us
to succeed in how we
live our life in a much
more skillful way.
Yeah
>> And this process that we're
talking about here is one
of those main reasons
why sometimes,
when people are working out,
or running, or even dancing,
or doing yoga that you might
experience anger come up for no
real apparent reason.
Or you might find yourself
laying on the mat and crying.
Or any emotion that arises,
that exactly we hear that,
and we are seeing, now
we know if we meditate
we'll be able to--
if we quiet the mind,
we can start to release
some of these things
like anxiety, which will
start to calm the body.
But it also works directly
with, as we're saying,
moving this vital life
force through our body
through movement, particularly
conscious movement with breath.
And one of the
things I love about,
really, these
Eastern traditions--
because when you
say, the psyche,
we are getting into a little
bit of the psychology of it,
and how to heal trauma, pain,
emotions, just regular trapped
things, that when
these energies come up,
and maybe you feel it as
energy or an emotion--
anger, frustration,
grief, sadness.
When they come up,
we don't actually
need to know where it came from.
We don't need to
know, why am I crying,
what exactly is this
anger connected to,
in order for it to release.
Like you're saying, you can
just move it, and things change.
And that drops us
into this space
of presence and receptivity.
>> Completely.
Yeah, I mean, if any of
those things are happening,
whether it's for myself or
anyone I'm working with,
it's to be celebrated
as far as I'm concerned.
When the emotional
content starts to move,
we're getting somewhere.
That can be a scary
thing for people.
And so how then do we
kind of create a structure
so we feel safe?
And I think one of the core
axioms of the tradition says,
where your mind goes,
your vital energy follows.
And so when we think about
the conditioned reality
of our attention
being outward, there's
vital intelligence that
is then also getting
expressed outward in a way
that is maybe unconscious.
And so the practices
completely flip that around.
We use our breath, we
use our mind to focus,
to turn the attention in.
And that starts to create
this alchemy or this process
where the energy starts
to follow the mind.
And so if we direct
our attention to--
if we feel pain, if we
feel emotional pain,
we have the capacity to tune
our awareness to the body,
to follow our breath, and to
penetrate that point so that we
can, in a safe and healthy way,
start to explore transformation
and healing while we're in
whatever the movement is.
So like you said,
whether it's running,
or whether it's
dancing, or whether it's
yoga, or whether
it's martial arts,
or whatever it is, the
notion of moving the body
to get energy going, to get
that substance freed up,
and then having the
intelligence, the presence,
the focus to then direct
it, the opportunity
there is that we can
become kind of masters
in where our energy is.
I can feel right now--
I can say, oh, wow, my energy
is pretty activated right now.
If I just even place my
awareness in my solar plexus,
and I drop my breath into that
space, I immediately shift.
I get more calm.
I'm more present.
My thoughts are more clear.
I'm really now tapped
right into the idea
that I'm sharing with
you in this moment.
And that skill set or that
skill can be practiced and then
put to use in so many ways.
>> So some of it
sounds really complex.
But I know it actually
can be fairly simple.
So will you show us
a practice that--
and I think another
important thing to point out
is that no matter
what experience we're
having energetically,
whether it be sad, or angry,
or frustrated, or overly
activated, or tired,
that there are some practices
that we can do for all of them.
We don't need to know all
this different information
and be a master in all
these different techniques
in order to know
something really specific
that we can do to
totally shift this energy
and become more
intelligent with it.
>> Yeah, completely.
And I think there are some basic
practices that essentially will
harmonize or balance the
total equation, whether you're
excessive, or whether you're
deficient in your energy,
or whether your
energy is blocked,
whether your energy
is all over the place.
I think the practice that I
would love to share today is
just a very simple, short,
three-minute practice that aims
to sort of neutralize,
disperse, harmonize, activate,
illuminate--
all of that, simultaneously,
in a really easy way.
>> Beautiful.
Awesome, let's do it.
>> Great.
So what we'll do is just
a few-minute practice.
It's borrowed from
the qi gong tradition,
and it's super
accessible, really easy.
It's going to be a
shaking practice.
So you're just going to take
your shoes off, I would say,
if you have shoes on.
And it'll be a
standing practice.
And if you happen
to be in a chair
and you need to stay in a
chair, that's also fine, too.
You can adapt, and accommodate
the practice for you there.
But we'll go
through the practice
to ultimately release,
and awaken, and restore
the vitality of our energy.
OK, so again we're
going to just step
into about a three-minute
qi gong practice right now.
And it's a preliminary practice.
And the thing I want
to say is that we're
going to be shaking our bodies
out for a few minutes, and just
kind of tapping the
body, and shaking around.
So it's very natural if you
feel a little self-conscious
about doing that.
If you find that that
comes up for you,
you're probably at home alone.
Don't worry about it.
Nobody cares.
Just go for it, and have
the energetic experience
of what this is like to
awaken your energy body
and feel that vitality.
So let's start.
You ready?
You good?
>> Ready.
>> So just go ahead
and bend your knees,
and kind of get
soft in the body.
Let the body drop a little bit.
So you're surrendering
to gravity.
And then we'll start with
lifting and dropping the heels.
So you pulse the
heels into the ground.
Go ahead and begin to
deepen your breath.
And as you're doing
this, feel the crown
of your head ascend up
towards the ceiling.
Go ahead and relax your jaw.
Relax your tongue.
And let's take a few
clearing breaths.
So just a deep breath in.
[INHALING DEEPLY]
Exhale at the mouth.
[EXHALING AND VOCALIZING A SLOW
"HA" SOUND]
So let sound move
through the body.
Breath in.
[INHALING DEEPLY]
[EXHALING AND VOCALIZING A SLOW
"HA" SOUND]
Again, deep breath in,
and a clearing breath out.
[EXHALING AND VOCALIZING A SLOW
"HA" SOUND]
Now you can keep
tapping the heels,
or you can kind of lift and tap
the whole foot down, and just
let the body start to
take whatever rhythm it's
going to take in the shake.
And let's start at the hands,
now, and shake out your hands--
and the wrists.
And then shake out
your shoulders.
[EXHALING THROUGH PURSED LIPS]
You're just taking deep
breaths in, deep breaths out.
[EXHALING SLOWLY AND DEEPLY]
[INHALING DEEPLY]
And then let's add a
pulse into the hips.
So we're going to bend
the knees here, and come
into kind of a deep
squat, and just pulse.
So we're challenging the glute
muscles, the thigh muscles.
And let's bring the palms
together and rub the hands.
[HANDS RUBBING TOGETHER]
[EXHALING SLOWLY AND DEEPLY]
And then once you get
that he going in the hand,
just pause in the
squat for a moment.
Get still.
Notice that there's some
energy in the hands.
And your thighs
might be heating up.
The glute muscles might
be heating up already.
We're going to stay for
maybe another 10 seconds.
Sit a little bit
deeper into the squat.
[EXHALING SLOWLY AND DEEPLY]
OK, and then let's start
to straighten out the legs,
release the arms,
and pulse again.
[EXHALING AND VOCALIZING A SLOW
"HA" SOUND]
Flutter out your lips.
[VIBRATING LIPS LOUDLY UPON
EXHALATION]
So that might reveal
some tension in the jaw.
So just stick out the tongue.
[VOCALIZING AN "AH" SOUND]
Stretch out the tongue,
stretch out the mouth.
[VOCALIZING AN "AH" SOUND]
Good, and then really
shake the whole body here.
[EXHALING SLOWLY AND DEEPLY]
And then let's begin
to tap the chest.
So you're going to make a
soft fist with your hands,
and just gently tap on
the center of your chest.
[THUMPING]
And we'll do one strong
tap and two light taps
as you're doing it.
So it's almost like a heartbeat.
[THUMPING WITH ALTERNATING
INTENSITY]
Still breathing.
So for this last little bit,
still tapping the chest,
shake the body from
the navel center.
So feel the navel center
shake the body out.
[EXHALING SLOWLY AND DEEPLY]
Good, now relax the arms,
and just little hops up.
[EXHALING SLOWLY AND DEEPLY]
[EXHALING AND VOCALIZING A SLOW
"HA" SOUND]
We'll take one deep
breath in here.
[INHALING DEEPLY]
Exhale at the mouth,
just completely release.
[EXHALING AND VOCALIZING A SLOW
"HA" SOUND]
Good.
And then get totally still.
Close the eyes.
Bring the breath in.
Inhale through the
nose into the heart.
[INHALING SOFTLY]
Exhale, soften the breath.
[EXHALING SOFTLY AND SLOWLY]
Breath in.
[INHALING SOFTLY]
Breath out.
[EXHALING SOFTLY AND SLOWLY]
And just notice any tingling,
or pulsing, or energy
moving in your body.
And we'll leave
the practice there.
>> Thanks, Kev.
That was awesome.
I feel totally
grounded, but awakened.
Yeah, thank you.
>> Awesome.
My pleasure.
>> Thank you so
much for joining us.
I'll see you next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]